A king is he that can hold his own, or else his title is vain.
Dawn is brief and the day full often belies its promise.
Works fair and wonderful are their own record,\n and only when they are in peril or broken forever do they pass into song.
Remember who and what thou art.
He that sows lies in the end shall not lack of a harvest.
Time flows ever, from the first note to the last chord.
It needs gold to breed gold.
We are not bound for ever to the circles of the world,\n and beyond them is more than memory.
The years will bring what they will.
Not all tears are an evil.
It must often be so, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up,\n lose them, so that others may keep them.
All's well as ends Better!
It is useless to meet revenge with revenge: it will heal nothing.
One thing drives out another.
There are some wounds which cannot be wholly cured.
Don't let your heads get too big for your hats.
Use well the days.
Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning\n whether I want it or not; or that you feel good this morning;\n or that it is a morning to be good on?
Never is too long a word.
Though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness,\n yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years,\n and none can foretell the time in which it will awake.
Wonder makes the words of praise louder.
Many like to know beforehand what is to be set on the table; but those who\n labour to prepare the feast like to keep their secret.
Do not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart.
It is not always good to be healed in body.\n Nor is it always evil to die in battle, even in bitter pain.
Those who have not swords can still die upon them.
It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two.
The hands of the King are hands of healing.
The healing hand should also wield the sword.
Pain and delight flow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness.
It's no good worrying about tomorrow. It probably won't come.
The Shadow can only mock, it cannot make.
It is not our part to master all the tides of the world,\n but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are set.
Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn.
Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth.
Deep in the hearts of all lies the sea-longing, which it is perilous to stir.
It is best to love first what you are fitted to love.
It's not always a misfortune being overlooked.
Hope oft deceives... yet twice blessed is help unlooked for.
Good will should not be denied.
Too late is worse than never.
Time does not stand still, though the Sun be lost.
In the morning counsels are best, and night changes many thoughts.
For your own good do all that you may.
Do not spoil the wonder with haste.
Deeds will not be less valiant because they are unpraised.
Remember old friendship and oaths long spoken.
Ifs are vain.
I don't believe in absolute evil but I believe in absolute good.
At the table small men may do the greater deeds.
Strange accents do not mar fair speech.
No need to brood on what tomorrow may bring.
Generous deed should not be checked by cold counsel.
Pride would be folly that disdained help and counsel at need.
Be not unjust in your grief.
Many a doer of great deeds might say no more.
Don't take names to yourself whether they are true or false.
Where there's life there's hope... and need of vittles.
If you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent.
The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.
Aurë entuluva! Day shall come again!
The praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards.
It seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth\n than to do so oneself.
Handsome is as handsome does.
A warrior should have more skills and knowledge\n than only the craft of weapons and slaying.
Better mistrust undeserved than rash words.
In the end the Shadow is only a small and passing thing:\n there is light and high beauty for ever beyond its reach.
I do not love the bright sword for its sharpness,\n nor the arrow for its swiftness, nor the warrior for his glory;\n I love only that which they defend.
What comes after must come.
Men can only come to morning through the shadows.
One good turn deserves another.
Even the wise cannot see all ends.
Do not be too eager to deal out death in the name of justice.
Many that live deserve death. And some that die deserve life.
The burned hand teaches best. After that advice about fire goes to the heart.
Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards,\n for they are subtle and quick to anger.
Things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them.
Strange are the turns of fortune!
The treacherous are ever distrustful.
Often does hatred hurt itself.
One who cannot cast away a treasure at need is in fetters.
The world changes, and all that once was strong now proves unsure.
Oft the unbidden guest proves the best company.
The wise speak only of what they know.
News from afar is seldom sooth.
In doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom.
Few can foresee whither their road will lead them, till they come to its end.
If we stayed at home and did nothing,\n doom would find us anyway, sooner or later.
It is easier to shout 'stop!' than to do it.
For not we but those who come after will make the legends of our time.
Good and ill have not changed since yesteryear;\n nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves and another among Men.
Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end.
Memory is not what the heart desires.
Time does not tarry ever,\n but change and growth is not in all things and places alike.
Maybe the paths that we each shall tread are already laid before our feet,\n though we do not see them.
Night must follow noon.
It's the job that's never started as takes longest to finish.
Seeing is both good and perilous.
Though in all lands love is now mingled with grief,\n it grows perhaps the greater.
The world is indeed full of peril, and in it there are many dark places,\n but still there is much that is fair.
Live and learn.
One must tread the path that need chooses.
Sworn word may strengthen quaking heart. Or break it.
Let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has not seen the nightfall.
Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens.
Despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt.
It is wisdom to recognise necessity.
None can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that.
Oft in lies truth is hidden.
He that breaks a thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom.
Such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world:\n small hands do them because they must,\n while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.
All that is gold does not glitter.
All that is gold does not glitter.\n Not all those who wander are lost.
Advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise,\n and all courses may run ill.
Seldom give unguarded advice.
Go not to the Elves for counsel, for they will say both no and yes.
Courage is found in unlikely places.
The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in,\n but you cannot forever fence it out.
You step into the Road, and if you don't keep your feet,\n there is no knowing where you might be swept off to.
Be careful of what you say, even to your closest friends.
Many that live deserve death. And some that die deserve life.\n Do not be too eager to deal out death in judgement.
The Road goes ever on and on.
Expect me when you see me.
If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold,\n it would be a merrier world.
While there's life there's hope.
There is nothing like looking, if you want to find something.
Great as your affairs may seem to you,\n they are only a small strand in the great web.
Let a King first rule his own house ere he corrects others.
Most men teach, and few men learn.
Let the unseen days be. Today is more than enough.
Help oft shall come from the hands of the weak when the Wise falter.
Go whither love leads you.
Love not too well the work of thy hands and the devices of thy heart.
Still round the corner there may wait,\n a new road or a secret gate.
All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given us.
And he took her in his arms and kissed her under the sunlit sky,\n and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls in the sight of many.
I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.
Moonlight drowns out all but the brightest stars.
I will not walk backward in life.
Even the smallest person can change the course of the future.
For still there are so many things that I have never seen:\n in every wood in every spring there is a different green.
But in the end, it's only a passing thing... this shadow.\n Even darkness must pass.
I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old:\n they choose the wisest person present to speak to.
You may know, or guess, what kind of a tale it is, happy-ending or sad-ending,\n but the people in it don't know. And you don't want them to.
Death is just another path. One that we all must take.
His grief he will not forget; but it will not darken his heart,\n it will teach him wisdom.
May the wind under your wings bear you where the sun sails and the moon walks.
Give with a free hand, but give of your own.
Fear both the heat and the cold of your heart,\n and try to have patience, if you can.
It may be the part of a friend to rebuke a friend's folly.
There is no real going back.
And Morgoth came.
'The Eagles! The Eagles!' he shouted. 'The Eagles are coming!'
Never laugh at live dragons.
Aiya Eärendil Elenion Ancalima!
Ēala ēarendel, engla beorhtast,\n ofer middangeard monnum sended,\n ond sōðfæsta sunnan lēoma,\n torht ofer tunglas, þū tīda gehwane\n of sylfum þē symle inlihtes!
Elen síla lúmenn' omentielvo!
Namárië! Nai hiruvalyë Valimar.\n Nai elyë hiruva. Namárië!
Ai! laurië lantar lassi súrinen,\n yéni únótimë ve rámar aldaron
Valaron kalanen! Firuvante!
Where there is love it is never truly dark.
'Say what you wish to say.'\n 'I have said it already. A hundred times over, in every way but words.'
Nothing is evil in the beginning.
'But that seems so simple!'\n 'The most important truths often are.'
Sometimes, to find the light we must first touch the darkness.
True creation requires sacrifice.
What cannot be known hollows the mind. Fill it not with guesswork.
